[develop]: Added HAFS v2.0.0 release notes along with physics schemes. (#273)
hafs-community/HAFS: doc/UsersGuide/source/Backgroundinfo/TechnicalOverview.rst

Technical Overview
*******************

> This chapter contains an overview of HAFS prerequisites, HAFS repository management and structure, workflow design, and HAFS v2.0.0 operational updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter contains an overview of HAFS prerequisites, HAFS repository management and structure, workflow design, and HAFS |version| operational updates.
```
It's easier to maintain the docs if the version number is updated automatically. You'll have to check `conf.py` tho to see if the version number is defined there. If not, add it (you can look at our other docs as a template).

> This chapter contains an overview of HAFS prerequisites, HAFS repository management and structure, workflow design, and HAFS |version| operational updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter contains an overview of HAFS prerequisites, HAFS repository management and structure, workflow design, and HAFS |latestr| operational updates.
```
Sorry, realized that version needs to stay `develop`, but we can solve the substitution issue this way.

.. figure:: https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/wiki/docs_images/hafs_workflow_schematic.png
    :width: 75 %
    :alt: HAFS Workflow Schematic

.. _OperationalUpdates:

===============================
HAFS v2.0.0 Operational Updates 
===============================

**Model:** Hurricane Analysis and Forecast System (HAFS)

**Version:** hafs.v2.0.0

**Released:** July 01, 2024, 1200UTC

**Location on GitHub:** `HAFS GitHub Repository <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/tree/production/hafs.v2>`

**Clone the repository:**

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone -b production/hafs.v2 --recursive  https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS.git ./hafs.v2.0.0

**Purpose:**

>     Run HAFS.v2 HFSA configuration to provide hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance to 5.25 days over all global oceanic basins, including NATL, EPAC, CPAC, WPAC, NIO, and SH basins. Run HAFS.v2 HFSB configuration to provide hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance for 5.25 days over NHC/CPHC basins, including NATL, EPAC, CPAC basins.

Reviewer: Best to define all acronyms. You could define in the Glossary and then use :term:`word` links.

**Developed by:**

>     EMC and the UFS Hurricane Application Team. See currently active HAFS developers `here <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1xBNxvAG8-Kk3GS93PndaPVZp_L8U-KqGRGNhnviXZMg/edit?usp=sharing>`__

Reviewer: Could you create a table with this information and add directly to the docs to avoid the issue of needing a Gmail account (or specifically a NOAA account) to access the info? It needs to be publicly available with no prerequisite re: account type.

> **Runs on:** WCOSS2

Reviewer: I believe it has also been tested on Hera and Orion. Maybe add a line like:
```suggestion
**Runs on:** WCOSS2; pre-implementation testing performed on Hera and Orion.
```

Input/Output
------------

**Input:**

>     - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) NetCDF format analysis for atmospheric initial condition, and 3-hourly GRIB2 files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) NetCDF format analysis for atmospheric initial conditions and 3-hourly GRIB2 files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components.
```

>     - Global RTOFS for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for MOM6 and HYCOM.

Reviewer: Define or link to acronyms throughout this section.

    - GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast for HFSA wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions.

>     - OBSPROC observational data for HAFS data assimilation.

Reviewer: Eventually, it would be good to link to an S3 bucket with all of this data, though that isn't possible now.

**Output:**
    - ATCF track forecast files, 4x/day at 00Z/06Z/12Z/18Z.

Locations for Output
--------------------

- **WCOSS2:**
    - HFSA: ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsa.yyyymmdd/hh``
    - HFSB: ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsb.yyyymmdd/hh``
- **Other servers:**

>     - NCEP ftp server, NOMADS, NWS Gateway/SBN

Reviewer: @BinLiu-NOAA Is there a link we could add for the NCEP ftp server, NOMADS, and/or the NWS Gateway/SBN?

Reviewer 2: For example NOMADS: https://nomads.ncep.noaa.gov/pub/data/nccf/com/hafs/prod/

Background
----------

Hurricane Analysis and Forecast System (HAFS), as the Unified Forecast System (UFS) hurricane application, is the FV3 (Finite­ Volume Cubed-Sphere Dynamical Core) based multi-scale model and data assimilation system capable of providing tropical cyclone (TC, including hurricane and typhoon) analyses and forecasts of the inner core structure key to improving storm size and intensity predictions, as well as the large-scale environment that is known to influence the TC's motion. HAFS development targets an operational data assimilation and modeling system, capable of providing reliable, robust and skillful model guidances for TC track, intensity (including rapid intensification), size, structure, rainfall and cyclone genesis, as well as for TC associated storm surge, sea surface waves, and tornadoes. HAFS is a community-based coupled earth modeling system specially calibrated for hurricane prediction with TC dynamics and physics, sophisticated vortex initialization and advanced inner-core data assimilation techniques, and various air-sea interaction processes.

> HAFSv2 will replace NCEP's current operational hurricane forecast systems, HAFSv1 in the 2024 hurricane season. The goal of this project is to upgrade the HAFSv1 that was running in operations in 2023. The system will provide improved and comparable tropical cyclone track and intensity forecast guidance in all global oceanic basins, as demonstrated through evaluation of retrospective and real time experiments compared against the two current configurations of operational HFSAv1 and HFSBv1.

Reviewer: Most of this information is already included in the introduction. I would remove this and update the introduction section with any details that appear here but not there. In the introduction, you can then link to the section below.

> HAFSv2 will replace NCEP's current operational hurricane forecast systems, HAFSv1 in the 2024 hurricane season. The goal of this project is to upgrade the HAFSv1 that was running in operations in 2023. The system will provide improved and comparable tropical cyclone track and intensity forecast guidance in all global oceanic basins, as demonstrated through evaluation of retrospective and real time experiments compared against the two current configurations of operational HFSAv1 and HFSBv1.

Reviewer: Most of this information is already included in the introduction. I would remove this and update the introduction section with any details that appear here but not there. In the introduction, you can then link to the section below. For example: 
"The specific HAFSv2 scientific changes to improve track and intensity forecast skills are summarized in :numref:`Section %s <scientific-updates>`."

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _scientific-updates:

```

Scientific Changes to Improve Track and Intensity Forecast Skills
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**System and Infrastructure Upgrades:**

>     - Latest version of ufs-weather-model, HAFSv2 final scientific configuration freeze on 02/08/2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Latest version of ``ufs-weather-model``, HAFSv2 final scientific configuration freeze on 02/08/2024.
```

    - Increase moving nesting horizontal resolution from 6-2 km to 5.4-1.8 km (HFSA only).
    - Reduce model time step from 90 to 72s (HFSB only).
    - Updated horizontal advection options.
    - Improved model stability and runtime efficiency.

**Vortex Initialization Improvement:**
    - Enhance vortex initialization to cycle hydrometeor variables and vertical velocity (HFSA only).

>     - Update compsitie vortex and reduce warm-cycling Vmax threshold from 50 to 40 kt (HFSA only).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update composite vortex and reduce warm-cycling Vmax threshold from 50 to 40 kt (HFSA only).
```

> **Data Assimilation Improvement:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Data Assimilation (DA) Improvement:**
```

>     - Ingest new high-resolution GOES-R mesoscale AMVs.

Reviewer: Define acronyms.

>     - Scale-Dependent Localization for innercore DA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Scale-Dependent Localization for inner core DA.
```

>     - Refine GPS RO (Radio Occultation) DA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Refine GPS Radio Occultation (RO) DA.
```

**Model Physics Advancement:**
    - Upgrade Thompson MP with bug fixes.
    - Thompson Microphysics for NATL basin, GFDL Microphysics for EPAC/CPAC and JTWC basins (HFSA only).

>     - Update TKE EDMF PBL and SASAS CP schemes with vertical wind shear impacts.

Reviewer: Define acronyms

    - Change the radiation calling time step from 720s to 900s (HFSA only).
    - Reduce radiation time step from 1800 to 720s (HFSB only).
    - Update CO2 fix files.

**Ocean/Wave Coupling:**

>     - MOM6 ocean model coupling (HFSA only).

Reviewer: @BinLiu-NOAA Is MOM6 an _option_ in HFSA, or has it completely replaced HYCOM?

Reviewer 2: Currently for HAFSv2, HFSA uses MOM6 coupling, while HFSB still uses HYCOM coupling. I believe in the future the plan is to use MOM6 coupling for both HFSA and HFSB configurations in a future HAFS upgrade.

    - CMEPS with inline-CDEPS coupling (HFSA only).

**Post-processing:**
    - Upgrade GFDL Tracker.

**Software Dependencies:**
    - See `here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`__

**Output Changes:**

>     - See `here <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1dGWu_k-CdiX_ndaRe89iDznyNwkEJfjVTagvvEVZQaw/edit?usp=sharing>`__

Reviewer: Let's not link to Google docs (for reasons mentioned above). Any info in a Google doc should be moved to the documentation itself if relevant.

Computer Resource Information
-----------------------------

**Computation resource updates:**

>     - See `here <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1otBHAi3hfB1Vu5lk9bfjOE-GZYalZiu9wjnFlevQRQw/edit?usp=sharing>`__

Reviewer: Extract info from Google doc.

**List of the module versions used in HAFS:**
    - See `here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`__

**Data retention for files in:** 
    - ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsa.yyyymmdd/hh`` and ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsb.yyyymmdd/hh``
        - **Disk space usage:** Increased from 145/140 GB (HFSAv1/HFSBv1) per cycle to ~295/195 GB (HFSAv2/HFSBv2).
        - **HPSS disk requirement:** Increased from ~142/126 GB (HFSAv1/HFSBv1) to ~228/133 GB (HFSAv2/HFSBv2).
        - **Preferred data retention in COM:** Files to be kept for 7 days.

> **Input Datasets**

Reviewer: This information is already listed above in the input/output section. We should consolidate all input/output info in one place. We usually have an input/output chapter, so it might be good to add info there and link it to it here.

    - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) NetCDF format analysis for atmospheric initial condition, and 3-hourly GRIB2 files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components. Global RTOFS for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for the ocean model component. GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast for HFSA wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions. OBSPROC observational data for HAFS data assimilation.

**Input DCOM Dependencies**
- The following scripts require input files from DCOM directory:
    - ``./scripts/exhafs_obs_prep.sh``: to decode/dump TDR/HDOB/TEMPDROP data
    - ``./scripts/exhafs_msg_check.py``: to check the message files are properly created by checking the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.
    - ``./ush/setup_hurricane``: for SDM to set up hurricane message files by extracting info from the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.

Pre-implementation Testing
--------------------------

> All jobs should be tested as part of this implementation.
> 
> **Does this change require a 30-day evaluation (for major implementations only)?**
>     No, but all changes have been tested successfully using available input as per the following list: `IT tests list <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qttu6HhZC3I2yEWLIcsTM7BUGxGyevhtZMUU61kSyYI/edit?usp=sharing>`__
> 
> **Who are the suggested evaluators?**
>     NHC, CPHC, and JTWC for model products and MAG for GEMPAK files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All changes have been tested successfully using available input as per the following list: `IT tests list <https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qttu6HhZC3I2yEWLIcsTM7BUGxGyevhtZMUU61kSyYI/edit?usp=sharing>`__

* NHC, CPHC, and JTWC were suggested to evaluate model products and MAG was suggested to evaluate GEMPAK files.
```
Need to put Google Doc info directly into these docs.

>     NHC, CPHC, and JTWC for model products and MAG for GEMPAK files.

Reviewer: @BinLiu-NOAA Did NHC, CPHC, and JTWC evaluate for model products and MAG for GEMPAK files? I know that was suggested, but it would be good if we could state what actually happened if we know.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the stakeholders (NHC, etc.) does evaluate the HAFS model products and MAG for GEMPAK files.

Dissemination and Archiving
---------------------------

**Dissemination Information:**

>     - The ATCF files to NHC (and CPHC for Central Pacific Basin storms), and JTWC (for all global basins, including SH basins), GRIB files for NOMADS and GEMPAK files for MAG.
>     - The users are NHC, CPHC, JTWC, MAG and NOMADS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files were disseminated as follows:
    - ATCF files to NHC (and CPHC for Central Pacific Basin storms) and JTWC (for all global basins, including SH basins), 
    - GRIB files to NOMADS
    - GEMPAK files to MAG
```
Define acronyms.

    - All the files in COM directory should be transferred from PROD WCOSS2 to DEV WCOSS2

>     - None of the codes are proprietary and there is no restricted data

Reviewer: ```suggestion

All the files in the COM directory should be transferred from PROD WCOSS2 to DEV WCOSS2. None of the code is proprietary, and there is no restricted data
```

**Archive to HPSS:**

>     All the files in the COM directory are preferred to be archived in 5-year retention HPSS directory.

Reviewer: Define acronyms

Implementation Details
----------------------

> See `here <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dKV_jAHs9TkOhS_qA-Nr3PPE_NtbGxaAgC5FSPI6BwQ/edit?usp=sharing>`__

Reviewer: Convert Google Doc info to reside directly in these docs.

.. figure:: https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/wiki/docs_images/hafs_workflow_schematic.png
    :width: 75 %
    :alt: HAFS Workflow Schematic

.. _OperationalUpdates:

===============================
HAFS v2.0.0 Operational Updates 
===============================

**Model:** Hurricane Analysis and Forecast System (HAFS)

**Version:** hafs.v2.0.0

**Released:** July 01, 2024, 1200UTC

> **Location on GitHub:** `HAFS GitHub Repository <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/tree/production/hafs.v2>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Location on GitHub:** `HAFS GitHub Repository <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/tree/production/hafs.v2>`_
```

**Clone the repository:**

.. code-block:: bash

>    git clone -b production/hafs.v2 --recursive  https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS.git ./hafs.v2.0.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   git clone -b production/hafs.v2 --recursive  https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS.git

.. attention::
   HAFSv2 runs in production on WCOSS2; pre-implementation testing was performed on Hera and Orion. It is likely possible to run on other systems, but additional code modifications may be required to run an experiment, and this capability has not yet been tested.
```

**Purpose:**

>     Run :term:`HAFS`.v2 :term:`HFSA` configuration to provide hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance to 5.25 days over all global oceanic basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC`, :term:`WPAC`, :term:`NIO`, and :term:`SH` basins. Run :term:`HAFS`.v2 :term:`HFSB` configuration to provide hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance for 5.25 days over :term:`NHC`/:term:`CPHC` basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC` basins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The :term:`HFSA` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance to 5.25 days over all global oceanic basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC`, :term:`WPAC`, :term:`NIO`, and :term:`SH` basins. 
* The :term:`HFSB` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance for 5.25 days over :term:`NHC`/:term:`CPHC` basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC` basins.
```
If they don't know what HAFS means by now, it's probably a lost cause ;)

**Developed by:**

>     EMC and the UFS Hurricane Application Team. See currently active HAFS developers below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    EMC and the UFS Hurricane Application Team. See active HAFSv2 developers in :numref:`Table %s <HAFSDevs>`.
    
.. _HAFSDevs:
```

> .. list-table:: HAFS Developers

Reviewer: @jdkublnick Now that I'm looking at the human-readable table on RTD, it might be nice to merge repeated cells. Let's discuss!

   :header-rows: 1

>    * - Area

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - Area of Expertise
```

     - Sarah D. Ditchek, Jason Sippel
   * - Data Assimilation
     - OU
     - Xuguang Wang
   * - Data Assimilation
     - UM/CIMAS
     - Altug Aksoy, Dan Wu
   * - Data Assimilation
     - UMD
     - Joseph Knisely, Kenta Kurosawa, Jonathan Poterjoy
   * - Data Assimilation
     - SUNY/U at Albany
     - Ryan Torn, Eun-Gyeong Yang
   * - Model Pre- and Post-processes
     - NCEP/EMC
     - George Gayno, Hui-Ya Chuang, Nathalie Rivera-Torres, Qingfu Liu, Chuan-Kai Wang, Wen Meng, Lin Zhu
   * - Model Pre- and Post-processes
     - GFDL
     - Timothy Marchok
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - NCEP/EMC
     - Jongil Han, Ruiyu Sun, Xu Li, Weiguo Wang, Fanglin Yang
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - AOML/HRD
     - Andrew Hazelton
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - UAH
     - Xiaomin Chen
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - PSL
     - Lisa Bengtsson
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - NCEP/EMC
     - Olivia Ostwald, Hananeh Jafary, Jiayi Peng
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - NHC
     - Michael Brennan, Jon Martinez, Ben Trabing, David Zelinsky, Wallace Hogsett, Jamie Rhome, Richard Pasch
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - JTWC
     - Brian Strahl, Levi Cowan
   

> **Runs on:** WCOSS2; pre-implementation testing performed on Hera and Orion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Input/Output
------------

> **Input:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Input Data:**
```

    - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) :term:`NetCDF` format analysis for atmospheric initial conditions and 3-hourly :term:`GRIB2` files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components.

>     - Global :term:`RTOFS` for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for :term:`MOM6` and :term:`HYCOM`.
>     - GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast for :term:`HFSA` wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Global :term:`RTOFS` files for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for :term:`MOM6` and :term:`HYCOM`.
    - GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast files for :term:`HFSA` wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions.
```

    - :term:`OBSPROC` observational data for HAFS data assimilation.

> **Input Datasets**
>     - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) NetCDF format analysis for atmospheric initial condition, and 3-hourly GRIB2 files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components. Global RTOFS for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for the ocean model component. GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast for HFSA wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions. OBSPROC observational data for HAFS data assimilation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This info is a duplicate of what's above.

> **Input DCOM Dependencies**
> - The following scripts require input files from DCOM directory:
>     - ``./scripts/exhafs_obs_prep.sh``: to decode/dump TDR/HDOB/TEMPDROP data
>     - ``./scripts/exhafs_msg_check.py``: to check the message files are properly created by checking the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.
>     - ``./ush/setup_hurricane``: for SDM to set up hurricane message files by extracting info from the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.
> 
> **Output:**
>     - ATCF track forecast files, 4x/day at 00Z/06Z/12Z/18Z.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Input DCOM Dependencies**
- The following scripts require input files from DCOM (data input) directory:
    - ``./scripts/exhafs_obs_prep.sh``: To decode/dump TDR/HDOB/TEMPDROP data
    - ``./scripts/exhafs_msg_check.py``: To check the message files are properly created by checking the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.
    - ``./ush/setup_hurricane``: For SDM to set up hurricane message files by extracting info from the original NHC/JTWC message files in the DCOM directory.

**Output:**
    - ATCF track forecast files, 4x/day at 00Z/06Z/12Z/18Z
```

Locations for Output
--------------------

- **WCOSS2:**
    - HFSA: ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsa.yyyymmdd/hh``
    - HFSB: ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsb.yyyymmdd/hh``
- **Other servers:**
    - NCEP ftp server, NOMADS, NWS Gateway/SBN

Background
----------

> HAFSv2 will replace NCEP's current operational hurricane forecast systems, HAFSv1 in the 2024 hurricane season. The goal of this project is to upgrade the HAFSv1 that was running in operations in 2023. The system will provide improved and comparable tropical cyclone track and intensity forecast guidance in all global oceanic basins, as demonstrated through evaluation of retrospective and real time experiments compared against the two current configurations of operational HFSAv1 and HFSBv1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HAFSv2 will replace NCEP's current operational hurricane forecast systems, HAFSv1 in the 2024 hurricane season. The upgraded system will provide improved and comparable tropical cyclone track and intensity forecast guidance in all global oceanic basins, as demonstrated through evaluation of retrospective and real time experiments compared against the two current configurations of operational HFSAv1 and HFSBv1.
```

.. _scientific-updates:

Scientific Changes to Improve Track and Intensity Forecast Skills
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**System and Infrastructure Upgrades:**

>     - Latest version of ``ufs-weather-model``, HAFSv2 final scientific configuration freeze on 02/08/2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Updated version of ``hafs-community/ufs-weather-model``, HAFSv2 final scientific configuration freeze on 02/08/2024.
```

**Vortex Initialization Improvement:**
    - Enhance vortex initialization to cycle hydrometeor variables and vertical velocity (HFSA only).
    - Update composite vortex and reduce warm-cycling Vmax threshold from 50 to 40 kt (HFSA only).

**Data Assimilation (DA) Improvement:**
    - Ingest new high-resolution :term:`GOES-R` mesoscale :term:`AMVs`.
    - Scale-Dependent Localization for inner core data assimilation.
    - Refine GPS Radio Occultation (RO) DA.

**Model Physics Advancement:**
    - Upgrade Thompson :term:`MP` with bug fixes.
    - Thompson Microphysics for :term:`NATL` basin, :term:`GFDL` Microphysics for :term:`EPAC`/:term:`CPAC` and :term:`JTWC` basins (:term:`HFSA` only).
    - Update :term:`TKE` :term:`EDMF` :term:`PBL` and :term:`SASAS` CP schemes with vertical wind shear impacts.
    - Change the radiation calling time step from 720s to 900s (HFSA only).
    - Reduce radiation time step from 1800 to 720s (HFSB only).
    - Update CO2 fix files.

**Ocean/Wave Coupling:**
    - MOM6 ocean model coupling (HFSA only).
    - CMEPS with inline-CDEPS coupling (HFSA only).

**Post-processing:**
    - Upgrade GFDL Tracker.

**Software Dependencies:**

>     - See `here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - See `list of dependencies here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`_.
```
The reason for the single `_` after the hyperlink is so it gives us a warning when there's more than one link with the same text. We _want_ this warning because linking on the same text reduces Section 508 compliance/makes documentation less accessible. As a general principle, it's best to avoid linking on the word "here" and instead use more descriptive words.

**Output Changes:**

> - **New variables in HAFSv2:**
>     - No
> 
> - **Removed variables:**
>     - No

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *New variables in HAFSv2:* No
- *Removed variables:* No
```

Computer Resource Information
-----------------------------

**Computation resource updates:**
    - HAFSv2 will use similar computing resources as HAFSv1.

>     - HWM: no significant node increase expected for the forecast job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - HAFS Weather Model (HWM): No significant node increase expected for the forecast job.
```

**List of the module versions used in HAFS:**

>     - See `here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - See `list of module version here <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/blob/production/hafs.v2/versions/run.ver>`_.
```
See comment above about `_` vs `__`.

**Data retention for files in:** 
    - ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsa.yyyymmdd/hh`` and ``/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com/hafs/v2.0/hfsb.yyyymmdd/hh``
        - **Disk space usage:** Increased from 145/140 GB (HFSAv1/HFSBv1) per cycle to ~295/195 GB (HFSAv2/HFSBv2).
        - **HPSS disk requirement:** Increased from ~142/126 GB (HFSAv1/HFSBv1) to ~228/133 GB (HFSAv2/HFSBv2).
        - **Preferred data retention in COM:** Files to be kept for 7 days.

> Pre-implementation Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pre-Implementation Testing
```

--------------------------

> * All changes have been tested successfully using available input as per the following list: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All changes have been tested successfully using available input from :numref:`Table %s <TestingInput>`.

.. _TestingInput:
```

.. list-table:: Test Objectives and Comments
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Test Objective
     - Comment
   * - Test two consecutive cycles for one storm in each global basin
     - Basic tests for each basin
   * - Very weak storm (<8 m/s)
     - Use GFS analysis as input (No VI/DA)
   * - Missing ICs from GDAS data
     - HAFS fails with proper error message
   * - Missing BCs from GFS data
     - HAFS fails with proper error message
   * - Missing previous cycle’s 6-hr forecast output
     - HAFS runs to completion in cold start mode
   * - Zero length data files for GSI
     - Initialization and analysis runs to completion
   * - Missing input data files for GSI
     - Initialization and analysis runs to completion
   * - Failed ocean initialization
     - HAFS runs in un-coupled mode
   * - Tracker fails to identify initial storm location
     - Swath generator fails with proper error message
   * - Cross dateline and Greenwich tests
     - Ensure HAFS model and scripts properly handle the specific situations
   * - Bugzilla Entries
     - Operational failure

> * NHC, CPHC, and JTWC were suggested to evaluate model products and MAG was suggested to evaluate GEMPAK files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NHC, CPHC, and JTWC were suggested to evaluate model products and MAG was suggested to evaluate GEMPAK files.
```
The MAG acronym hasn't yet been described.

Dissemination and Archiving
---------------------------

**Dissemination Information:**
Files were disseminated as follows:
    - ATCF files to NHC (and CPHC for Central Pacific Basin storms) and JTWC (for all global basins, including SH basins), 
    - GRIB files to NOMADS
    - GEMPAK files to MAG

> All the files in the :term:`COM` directory should be transferred from PROD WCOSS2 to DEV WCOSS2. None of the code is proprietary, and there is no restricted data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the files in the :term:`COM` directory should be transferred from PROD WCOSS2 to DEV WCOSS2. None of the code is proprietary, and there is no restricted data.
```

**Archive to HPSS:**

>     All the files in the :term:`COM` directory are preferred to be archived in 5-year retention :term:`HPSS` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the files in the :term:`COM` directory are preferred to be archived in 5-year retention :term:`HPSS` directory.
```

.. figure:: https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/wiki/docs_images/hafs_workflow_schematic.png
    :width: 75 %
    :alt: HAFS Workflow Schematic

.. _OperationalUpdates:

===============================
HAFS v2.0.0 Operational Updates 
===============================

**Model:** Hurricane Analysis and Forecast System (HAFS)

**Version:** hafs.v2.0.0

**Released:** July 01, 2024, 1200UTC

**Location on GitHub:** `HAFS GitHub Repository <https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS/tree/production/hafs.v2>`_

**Clone the repository:**

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone -b production/hafs.v2 --recursive  https://github.com/hafs-community/HAFS.git

.. attention::
   HAFSv2 runs in production on WCOSS2; pre-implementation testing was performed on Hera and Orion. It is likely possible to run on other systems, but additional code modifications may be required to run an experiment, and this capability has not yet been tested.

**Purpose:**

> * The :term:`HFSA` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance to 5.25 days over all global oceanic basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC`, :term:`WPAC`, :term:`NIO`, and :term:`SH` basins. 
> * The :term:`HFSB` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance for 5.25 days over :term:`NHC`/:term:`CPHC` basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC` basins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * The :term:`HFSA` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance to 5.25 days over all global oceanic basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC`, :term:`WPAC`, :term:`NIO`, and :term:`SH` basins. 
   * The :term:`HFSB` configuration provides hurricane track and intensity forecast guidance for 5.25 days over :term:`NHC`/:term:`CPHC` basins, including :term:`NATL`, :term:`EPAC`, :term:`CPAC` basins.
```

   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - AOML/HRD
     - Andrew Hazelton
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - UAH
     - Xiaomin Chen
   * - Atmospheric Physics
     - PSL
     - Lisa Bengtsson
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - NCEP/EMC
     - Olivia Ostwald, Hananeh Jafary, Jiayi Peng
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - NHC
     - Michael Brennan, Jon Martinez, Ben Trabing, David Zelinsky, Wallace Hogsett, Jamie Rhome, Richard Pasch
   * - Verification/Evaluation
     - JTWC
     - Brian Strahl, Levi Cowan
   

Input/Output
------------

**Input Data:**
    - Global Forecast System (GFS, including GFS/GDAS) :term:`NetCDF` format analysis for atmospheric initial conditions and 3-hourly :term:`GRIB2` files (up to 129 h) for atmospheric lateral boundary conditions and atmospheric forcing for oceanic and wave model components.
    - Global :term:`RTOFS` files for oceanic initial and boundary conditions for :term:`MOM6` and :term:`HYCOM`.
    - GFS/GDAS global wave analysis/forecast files for :term:`HFSA` wave component initial and lateral boundary conditions.
    - :term:`OBSPROC` observational data for HAFS data assimilation.

**Input DCOM Dependencies**

> - The following scripts require input files from DCOM (data input) directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following scripts require input files from DCOM (data input) directory:

```

     - Basic tests for each basin
   * - Very weak storm (<8 m/s)
     - Use GFS analysis as input (No VI/DA)
   * - Missing ICs from GDAS data
     - HAFS fails with proper error message
   * - Missing BCs from GFS data
     - HAFS fails with proper error message
   * - Missing previous cycle’s 6-hr forecast output
     - HAFS runs to completion in cold start mode
   * - Zero length data files for GSI
     - Initialization and analysis runs to completion
   * - Missing input data files for GSI
     - Initialization and analysis runs to completion
   * - Failed ocean initialization
     - HAFS runs in un-coupled mode
   * - Tracker fails to identify initial storm location
     - Swath generator fails with proper error message
   * - Cross dateline and Greenwich tests
     - Ensure HAFS model and scripts properly handle the specific situations
   * - Bugzilla Entries
     - Operational failure

NHC, CPHC, and JTWC were suggested to evaluate model products and MAG was suggested to evaluate GEMPAK files.

Dissemination and Archiving
---------------------------

**Dissemination Information:**
Files were disseminated as follows:

>     - ATCF files to NHC (and CPHC for Central Pacific Basin storms) and JTWC (for all global basins, including SH basins), 
>     - GRIB files to NOMADS
>     - GEMPAK files to MAG

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- ATCF files to NHC (and CPHC for Central Pacific Basin storms) and JTWC (for all global basins, including SH basins) 
- GRIB files to NOMADS
- GEMPAK files to MAG
```
